---
title: linux时钟介绍
date: 2022-10-16 18:14:50
tags:
- clock
- rtc
- time
categories:
- 博客
---

linux中时钟的实现介绍

<!-- more -->

- [time(7) - Linux manual page (man7.org)](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/time.7.html)
  !!!!
  > High-resolution timers
  >     Before Linux 2.6.21, the accuracy of timer and sleep system calls
  >     (see below) was also limited by the size of the jiffy.
  >
  > ​    Since Linux 2.6.21, Linux supports high-resolution timers (HRTs),
  > ​    optionally configurable via CONFIG_HIGH_RES_TIMERS.  On a system
  > ​    that supports HRTs, the accuracy of sleep and timer system calls
  > ​    is no longer constrained by the jiffy, but instead can be as
  > ​    accurate as the hardware allows (microsecond accuracy is typical
  > ​    of modern hardware).  You can determine whether high-resolution
  > ​    timers are supported by checking the resolution returned by a
  > ​    call to clock_getres(2) or looking at the "resolution" entries in
  > ​    /proc/timer_list.
  >
  > ​    HRTs are not supported on all hardware architectures.  (Support
  > ​    is provided on x86, arm, and powerpc, among others.)
- !!! [rtc(4) - Linux manual page (man7.org)](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/rtc.4.html)
  - RTCs(Real Time Clocks)指PC等设备上的一块硬件时钟，一般使用纽扣电池供电。记录了"wall clock"时间（离POSIX Epoch的秒+微秒数）
    - 通过ioctrl来控制
    - 一些RTCs支持alarm中断，周期中断
    - Hardware Clock: also called the hardware clock, the real time clock, the RTC, the BIOS clock, and the CMOS clock.
      https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/hwclock.8.html#:~:text=Clocks%20in%20a%20Linux%20System
      > The most normal way is to do I/O to the rtc device
      >        special file, which is presumed to be driven by the rtc device
      >        driver. 
  - System clock，系统时间，指内核软件维护的时间，用于实现gettimeofday，time等函数。通常通过timer中断实现，中断频率一般为100，1000每秒。
  - 在电脑开机时，kernel将System clock设置为RTCs时间。对于没有RTCs的设备，则需要通过网络同步时间
- clock(3)
  - > In glibc 2.17 and earlier, clock() was implemented on top of
    >        times(2).  For improved accuracy, since glibc 2.18, it is
    >        implemented on top of clock_gettime(2) (using the
    >        CLOCK_PROCESS_CPUTIME_ID clock).
- calendar time
  - time_t
  - time since Epoch ( 1970-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 (UTC))
  - ex
    ```
     clock_gettime(2) CLOCK_REALTIME
     time(2)
    ```
- broken-down time
  - struct tm
  - ctime(3)
[Kernel Timer Systems - eLinux.org](https://elinux.org/Kernel_Timer_Systems)

