---
title: openwrt编译
date: 2022-02-13 01:18:16
tags: [openwrt, 如何实现网络自由, 折腾]
---

## Openwrt 编译

### 优点

1. 固件体积减小（需要安装的package被压缩到镜像中）
2. 可以定制一些需要的选项（busybox可以选择zsh）

> The main advantage of building your own firmware is that it compresses the files, so that you will have room for much more stuff. It is particularly noticeable on routers with 16 MB flash RAM or less. It also lets you change some options that can only be changed at build time, for instance the features included in BusyBox and the block size of SquashFS. Larger block size will give better compression, but may also slow down the loading of files. (ref: [[OpenWrt Wiki\] Quick image building guide](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/additional-software/beginners-build-guide))

3. 下次刷机，可以不用进行软件安装，配置
<!--more-->

### openwrt build system特点

- 不用配置编译链

> While it is possible to manually create your toolchain, and then build OpenWrt with it, this is difficult and error-prone. The OpenWrt build system takes a different approach to building a firmware: it downloads, patches and compiles everything from scratch, including the cross compiler. Or to put it in simpler terms, OpenWrt's build system doesn't contain any executables or even sources. It is an automated system for downloading the sources, patching them to work with the given platform and compiling them correctly for the platform. What this means is that just by changing the template, you can change any step in the process. And of course the side benefit of this is that builds are automated, which saves time and guarantees the same result every time.
>
> For example if a new kernel is released, a simple change to one of the Makefiles will download the latest kernel, patch it to run on the requested platform and produce a new firmware image. There's no work to be done trying to track down an unmodified copy of the existing kernel to see what changes had been made - the patches are already provided and the process ends up almost completely transparent. This doesn't just apply to the kernel, but to anything included with OpenWrt - it's this strategy that allows OpenWrt to stay on the bleeding edge with the latest compilers, kernels and applications. (ref: [[OpenWrt Wiki\] Build system essentials](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-developer/build-system/buildsystem_essentials))

- 编译出来的toolchain位置

> `staging_dir/toolchain…` is a mini Linux root with its own `bin/`, `lib/`, etc that contains the cross C compiler used to build the rest of the firmware. You can actually use that to compile simple C programs outside of OpenWRT that can be loaded onto the firmware. The C compiler might be something like: `staging_dir/toolchain-mips_34kc_gcc-4.8-linaro_uClibc-0.9.33.2/bin/mips-openwrt-linux-uclibc-gcc`. You can see the version of the CPU, the C library and gcc encoded into it; this allows multiple targets to be built in the same area concurrently.

### 编译

#### 依赖

- 根据[[OpenWrt Wiki\] Build system setup](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-developer/toolchain/install-buildsystem)安装对应

#### 编译

- 参考：

  - 官方教程：[[OpenWrt Wiki\] Build system usage](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-developer/toolchain/use-buildsystem)
  - **非常好的一个教程**：[How To Compile OpenWrt Firmware For Any Router · GitHub](https://gist.github.com/chankruze/dee8c2ba31c338a60026e14e3383f981)

- 命令汇总

  ```bash
  # Download and update the sources
  git clone https://git.openwrt.org/openwrt/openwrt.git
  cd openwrt
  git pull
  
  # Select a specific code revision
  git branch -a
  git tag
  git checkout v21.02.1
  
  # Update the feeds
  ./scripts/feeds update -a
  ./scripts/feeds install -a
  
  # Configure the firmware image and the kernel
  make menuconfig
  #make kernel_menuconfig
  
  #download all dependency source files before final make, enables multi-core compilation
  make download
  
  # Build the firmware image
  #make (or make world)
  #when faild, V=s show all command executed
  #make V=s
  
  make -j $(nproc) 2>&1 tee | make.log
  ```

- Cleaning Up

  ```bash
  make clean #deletes contents of the directories /bin and /build_dir. make clean does not remove the toolchain, it also avoids cleaning architectures/targets other than the one you have selected in your .config
  
  make dirclean #deletes contents of the directories /bin and /build_dir and additionally /staging_dir and /toolchain (=the cross-compile tools) and /logs. 'Dirclean' is your basic "Full clean" operation.
  
  make distclean #nukes everything you have compiled or configured and also deletes all downloaded feeds contents and package sources.
  
  #clean small part
  make target/linux/clean  		#Clean linux objects 
  make package/base-files/clean 	#Clean package base-files objects
  make package/luci/clean 		#Clean luci
  ```

#### menuconfig常用软件

- Target System(MediaTek Ralink MIPS)
- Subtarget(MT7621 based boards)
- Target Profile(Xiaomi Redmi Router AC2100)
- **Target Images**
  - 取消勾选ramdisk，否者会生成`openwrt-ramips-mt7621-xiaomi_mi-router-4a-gigabit-initramfs-kernel.bin`
  - 勾选squashfs，可以调节block size（默认256B），越大的块压缩率更好，但读取速度更慢（可能影响重启速度？）
- Build the Openwrt SDK：一个小的buildroot，用于测试自己的package
- Package the Openwrt-based Toolchain：交叉编译链
- **Base system**
  - 使用Openclash需要取消勾选dnsmasq（已经勾选dnsmasq-full）
- Administration
  - htop
- **Development**
  - gcc, gdb等工具
- Fonts
  - DejaVu字体，可能zsh乱码原因？
- **Kernel modules**
  - USB support：usb2.0和usb3.0支持
  - Other modules/kmod-mtd-rw：开启uboot等flash分区写权限
- **Languages**
  - python
    - requests
    - lxml
- **Luci**
  - Collections
    - Luci：否则没有图形界面
  - Module
    - luci-compat：据说是必要的
  - Application
    - adblock
    - ddns
    - Openclash（需要自己添加）
    - qos
    - samba4
    - upnp
    - wireguard
    - wol
- Network
  - VPN: **zerotier**
  - SSH: openssh-server：默认使用dropbear作为ssh服务器，没必要额外安装
- Utilities
  - Editors
    - vim-full（只能选一个）
  - Shells
    - bash
    - zsh会乱码

##### image大小参考

满足16MB的一种配置：

- squashfs块大小设置为512KB
- 开启：htop, **python**(requests, lxml), **Luci**, adblock, ddns, qos, upnp, **wireguard**, wol, **zerotier**, vim-full, bash
- 大小为15991868B/16121856B，把k2p压榨到只剩126KB了。
